Update Trace specification to use W3C Trace Context Level 2; add Random flag (#3924)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/context/api-propagators.md

X-Ray trace header protocol MUST NOT be maintained or distributed as part of
the Core OpenTelemetry repositories.

### W3C Trace Context Requirements

A W3C Trace Context propagator is expected to implement the
`traceparent` and `tracestate` contexts fields specified in [W3C Trace
Context Level 2](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context-2/).

When injecting and extracting trace context to or from a carrier, the
following fields are propagated.

- TraceID (16 bytes)
- SpanID (8 bytes)
- TraceFlags (8 bits)
- TraceState (string)

> Propagators MUST NOT assume that bits 2-7 (6 most significant bits)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Propagators MUST NOT assume that bits 2-7 (6 most significant bits) of the TraceFlags
```

Author: This statement has to be modified given the W3C specification text. 😢

> will be zero, as they are reserved for future use and are expected to

Reviewer: The W3C TraceContext Level 2 spec says that these must be set to zero: https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context-2/#other-flags. It will be good to clarify this here.

Reviewer 2: This conflicts with https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context-2/#a-traceparent-is-received

> The vendor will only parse the trace-flags values supported by this version of this specification and ignore all other values. If parsing fails, the vendor creates a new traceparent header and deletes the tracestate. Vendors will set all unparsed / unknown trace-flags to 0 on outgoing requests.

Author: I believe, then, my entire PR is invalid. 

This makes me question whether W3C specification is for the best, because it will be many ages before the new flag becomes useful. Perhaps we should not think of intermediate processors such as the trace SDK or a sampling processor to be "vendors" in this sense. If the W3C specification says not to propagate and respect future-defined flags, it could be maybe 5 years before we're able to use the new randomness flag. If that's what we want, I'll close this PR.

Reviewer 3: In my understanding the handling of unknown flags currently mandated by the spec is motivated as follows: Propagating an unknown flag value downstream as `1` because it was `1` in the header incoming from upstream effectively makes the participant claim a fact without knowing what it actually claims.

I'll try to explain this with a concrete example. Let's assume for the sake of the argument that the spec had started _without_ the sampled flag, and we would introduce the sampled flag now in version 2. The sampled flag is effectively _a fact about the actions of the specific participant that sends the header downstream_, it is not a fact about the trace _as a whole_. Its semantic when sending a `1` downstream is "I have sampled this request".

Imagine the following scenario: 
* Service A (which already supports the newer version and understands the sampled flag) sends `sampled=1` to service B.
* Service B implements the older version of the spec and it does not know about the sampled flag.
* Service B decides to not sample this request (ultimately, each participant can make its own sampling decision). 
* If the rule would be "propagate unknown flags as received", service B would propagate `sampled=1` downstream, although it did not sample. So service B would effectively claim something that is not true.

I think the underlying problem in this discussion (and I'm only realizing this now as well) is the following: There are different kinds of flags.
1. We have flags that represent a fact about the actions of the most recent participant (like sampled).
2. There are also flags that represent facts about the trace as a whole, and which can be fully determined by the participant starting the trace -- like the new randomness flag. 

Ideally, we would have different propagation behaviors for these two kinds of flags -- "set unknown flags to 0" for (1.), and "propagate as-is" for (2.). However, such a distinction is currently not possible. When the current rule (set unknown flags to 0 when sending the header downstream) was put in place, there was only the sampled flag. Maybe the assumption back then was that other flags would also be of type (1.), although that is pure speculation on my part (I wasn't around back then).

Some other remarks:

> Perhaps we should not think of intermediate processors such as the trace SDK or a sampling processor to be "vendors" in this sense.

I disagree with this. "Vendor" might not be the best term (and we have replaced it in more recent versions of the spec with "participant" I think), but every piece of software interacting with the `traceparent` header must follow the spec if it claims to be compliant, we cannot arbitrarily claim "oh, I'm not a vendor, I'll just do something different".

> If the W3C specification says not to propagate and respect future-defined flags, it could be maybe 5 years before we're able to use the new randomness flag. If that's what we want, I'll close this PR.

I fully understand your frustration with this. Indeed, it would take a while to get this level implemented across the board, and it will be less useful if only a subset of SDKs have implemented it.

In my opinion, there is basically a tradeoff between speed of adoption of new flags and correctness of propagated flags, and the spec choose to value the latter over the former.

Author: OK. This feels like a missed opportunity, I'd call it a defect in the Level 1 specification. There are 6 more bits reserved but with very narrow applications, meanwhile we cannot easily add new claims that propagate through existing code.

> basically a tradeoff between speed of adoption of new flags and correctness of propagated flags

I'm not sure how we should define "correct". Any correctness arguments about the Sampled flag are made knowing that there was not a Level 0 specification. The way Sampled is defined, it matches your "propagate-as-is" category, it is [replete with "SHOULD" and "MAY" statements](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#sampled-flag) about how it ought to be used including a "sampled flag should be propagated unchanged" default.

I can't see how the Random flag can be said to be "correct" in an environment with mixed specification versions that will not propagate it by default. I do not see how OpenTelemetry can make use of it -- the flag is only useful when all participants propagate it, and the specification provides no way to check that all participants are at the specified level. I would call the Random flag "dead on arrival"; I see no reason to write it into OpenTelemetry specifications.

> Maybe the assumption back then was that other flags would also be of type (1.)
> [...]
> participant claim a fact without knowing what it actually claims.

Perhaps it is wrong to view these flags as "facts", anyway. Sampled is a claim, the way it is specified, and so is Random. If you want to put a fact into your context, the `tracestate` field is there for you. I know we can't change the past specification, but it's too bad. :(

Author: By the way, when OTel added a new Span flag in its 1.1 specification, two bits were allocated: one is a new claim about the context (0x100), and one is a claim that the first bit is meaningful (0x200). This is how the W3C specification could have accommodated "hard facts" in a world with mixed versions.

Reviewer: Thanks @jmacd and @basti1302. 

I agree that this is a defect in the Level 1 specification.

I will add this to the agenda for next Tue's W3C DT working group meeting to evaluate if there's anything we can change to at least the _Level 2_ spec (which is currently in CR status). 

I understand that won't solve the situation with the randomness-flag, but want to see if there is any solution to at least mitigate this problem for Level 3 and beyond.

Reviewer 3: FWIW, I very much disagree that this is a defect in level 1. :-)

Reviewer: If it doesn't work in mixed mode environments, how do you see such new capabilities being adopted?  Currently, the only way this can be used is for ALL the participants to upgrade to Level 2 of the spec - which may not be practical in environments with large number of participants.

I was going by the criteria of mixed mode environments (which is the common case in a DT scenario). Ideally when a new capability (say a new flag) is introduced, we want whoever understands that newer capability to benefit from it. But in the current model, that's not possible, even if there's one older participant in the mix. 

Your earlier response on why the Level 1 spec could have modelled it that way makes sense. I think what Josh/I are saying is the above f/w compat is a strong requirement, without which we cannot introduce new capabilities and expect adoption. 

So, similar to what OTel is doing, maybe more bits are needed to express this and not just a single bit...

Happy to discuss more (either here and/or in the next W3C DT meeting).

Reviewer 4: > In my understanding the handling of unknown flags currently mandated by the spec is motivated as follows: Propagating an unknown flag value downstream as `1` because it was `1` in the header incoming from upstream effectively makes the participant claim a fact without knowing what it actually claims.
> 

But it feels even worse when a participant _changes_ a flag from 1 to 0, without even knowing what it means.

Reviewer 4: > I think the underlying problem in this discussion (and I'm only realizing this now as well) is the following: There are different kinds of flags.
> 
> 1. We have flags that represent a fact about the actions of the most recent participant (like sampled).
> 2. There are also flags that represent facts about the trace as a whole, and which can be fully determined by the participant starting the trace -- like the new randomness flag.
> 
> Ideally, we would have different propagation behaviors for these two kinds of flags -- "set unknown flags to 0" for (1.), and "propagate as-is" for (2.). However, such a distinction is currently not possible. 

Indeed, so perhaps just to open a path for moving forward we can consider the following. We have 8 bits - how about splitting them into the above categories today, let's say 4+4 - before these bits are defined. This would still be a breaking change for the specs, of course.

X-Ray trace header protocol MUST NOT be maintained or distributed as part of
the Core OpenTelemetry repositories.

### W3C Trace Context Requirements

A W3C Trace Context propagator is expected to implement the
`traceparent` and `tracestate` context fields specified in [W3C Trace
Context Level 2](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context-2/).

When injecting and extracting trace context to or from a carrier, the
following fields are propagated.

- TraceID (16 bytes)
- SpanID (8 bytes)
- TraceFlags (8 bits)
- TraceState (string)

There are two trace flag values defined in W3C Trace Context Level 2

> specification, `Sampled` (0x1) and `Random` (0x2).  Propagators MUST

Reviewer 5: Can we avoid defining normative requirements outside of the W3C specification. This introduces two 'source-of-truth' for implementations to follow.

```suggestion
specification, `Sampled` (0x1) and `Random` (0x2).  Propagators need to
```
